# Challenge 07 - Tracing Intelligence: Observability in Agentic AI with Semantic Kernel

 [< Previous Challenge](./Challenge-06.md) - **[Home](../README.md)** - [Next Challenge >](./Challenge-08.md)
 
## Introduction

When you build AI solutions, you want to be able to observe the behavior of your services. Observability is the ability to monitor and analyze the internal state of components within a distributed system. It is a key requirement for building enterprise-ready AI solutions.

## Concepts

Observability is typically achieved through logging, metrics, and tracing. They are often referred to as the three pillars of observability. You will also hear the term "telemetry" used to describe the data collected by these three pillars. Unlike debugging, observability provides an ongoing overview of the system's health and performance.

Semantic Kernel is designed to be observable. It emits logs, metrics, and traces that are compatible to the OpenTelemetry standard. 

Specifically, Semantic Kernel provides the following observability features:

- **Logging**: Semantic Kernel logs meaningful events and errors from the kernel, kernel plugins and functions, as well as the AI connectors.
- **Metrics**: Semantic Kernel emits metrics from kernel functions and AI connectors. You will be able to monitor metrics such as the kernel function execution time, the token consumption of AI connectors, etc.
- **Tracing**: Semantic Kernel supports distributed tracing. You can track activities across different services and within Semantic Kernel.

You can use the following observability tools to monitor and analyze the behavior of your services built on Semantic Kernel.
- [**Console:** ](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/semantic-kernel/concepts/enterprise-readiness/observability/telemetry-with-console?tabs=Powershell-CreateFile%2CEnvironmentFile&pivots=programming-language-csharp)
Although the console is not a recommended way to inspect telemetry data, it is a simple and quick way to get started.
- [**Application Insights:** ](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/semantic-kernel/concepts/enterprise-readiness/observability/telemetry-with-app-insights?tabs=Powershell&pivots=programming-language-csharp)
Application Insights is part of Azure Monitor, which is a comprehensive solution for collecting, analyzing, and acting on telemetry data from your cloud and on-premises environments.
- [**Aspire Dashboard:** ](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/semantic-kernel/concepts/enterprise-readiness/observability/telemetry-with-aspire-dashboard?tabs=Powershell&pivots=programming-language-csharp)
Aspire Dashboard is part of the .NET Aspire offering. The dashboard allows developers to monitor and inspect their distributed applications.
- [**Azure AI Foundry Tracing UI:** ](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/semantic-kernel/concepts/enterprise-readiness/observability/telemetry-with-azure-ai-foundry-tracing)
Azure AI Foundry Tracing UI is a web-based user interface that allows you to visualize traces and logs generated by your applications in Application Insights.

## Description
You should incorporate observability into your application using Azure AI Foundry Tracing UI with Application Insights or Aspire Dashboard. 
Use the application created in the previous challenge.

## Success Criteria
- Ensure that your application is running and you can visualize traces on Azure AI Foundry Tracing UI with Application Insights or with Aspire Dashboard
- Inspect the telemetry data by navigating to logs and traces and observe the sequence of calls.
- Demonstrate that you can see through the telemetry the content and history sent to the LLM calls.

## Learning Resources
- [Observability in Semantic Kernel | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/semantic-kernel/concepts/enterprise-readiness/observability/?pivots=programming-language-csharp)